products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Technically, Colonel Henry Hill is retired, but actually he's never been busier.
We could do a whole show on Henry Hill's service since his military service ended, and we will talk about that.
But first, I want you to meet Colonel Henry Hill, the Vietnam A-37 pilot who flew 360 missions, including some of the most dangerous missions during the 1968 Tet Offensive.
It's our pleasure to welcome Air Force Colonel Henry Hill to Veterans of the Valley.
It is indeed a pleasure to have you, Henry.
You were born in Milam County.
You say right across the river from Hearn and you went to Cameron Yeo High School.
But eventually you came to Texas A&M.
I want to start off with that.
Your decision to come to Texas A&M and and your arrival here and sort of talk about what the campus and the community was like back then when you came in 1952.
Well,
Dad and I got in the car, and we drove to Milner Hall.
Yeah.
And I had gotten a job to work in Sebesa as a Sebesa volunteer.
We unloaded, and he left and went home.
And my roommate happened to be a classmate in high school, and so I wasn't totally estranged.
And I ended up here because...
of that man, Monroe Fox.
He said where I was going to college, and I told him that I couldn't, and he said, well, why don't you go talk to him at A&M, and I did, and then my dad and I had a conversation, and a typical teenager, he said, he said, I can't send you to college.
I said, well, I didn't ask you to send me to college.
I'm going to go to college, and so I did.
I came down here and worked my way through school, and
I enjoyed it.
It was tough, but I worked in a dining hall and I had a small scholarship.
Nowadays, it'd be very small, but in those days, it was about 25% of the total cost of going to school.
Right.
You told me in 1953, you tried out for the fencing team and you were a left-handed fencer, which made you kind of a special opponent for people.
Talk about that.
I found out about the fencing team, and I still had to take another year of physical ed, and so I went out for the fencing team.
I was a left-hander, and the two best fencers in the Gulf Coast AAU of fencing were left-handers.
They were from Galveston, Bill Brown and Bill Baird.
So everybody wanted to fence me so they could get the experience of being against the left-hander.
And as you said earlier, it was kind of being on the scout team, but I ended up lettering that year
as we won the Southwest Conference Championship.
Congratulations.
That's great.
You graduated from A&M in 1956, and that's when you went on active duty with the Air Force.
You went to Lackland, then to Georgia, and then to Big Spring, and that's where you got your jet training.
Talk a little bit about that, and then go on and eventually what led you to Vietnam, because it took a while for you to get to Vietnam.
You wanted to go earlier, but they had other assignments for you.
Well, I graduated from Big Spring and Situations had a residence, so I ended up with an assignment to ground radar in Limestone, Maine, which is one mile from the Canadian border in the northern Aroostook County, potato country.
Anyhow, after about nine months, we had the Komori crisis that occurred.
when the Chinese were shelling those two islands, which belonged to Taiwan.
And so they said, do you want to go to Japan?
And I said, yes, to get out of that northern clime, not being as alert as I should have that much of Japan is north of Tokyo, but I didn't get to go there.
I went south of Tokyo to Itazuki Air Base,
and then deployed out to a 25-acre island for nine months and then to a larger island east of or west of Nagasaki for the last three months.
Came back to the States, went to Panama City, Florida, and while I was there, I went to a professional school and lost a friend in Vietnam.
My wife and I talked it over, and so I volunteered to go to Vietnam.
And they said, no, no.
You belong to the training command, so you're going back and be an instructor pilot in Big Spring, Texas.
And so I went back to Big Spring.
It had changed, of course, from the time whenever I was there as a student pilot.
Did my three and a half years and got selected for promotion and asked for a volunteer to Vietnam and listed every airplane that they had.
Put the A-37 down, not knowing whether it was even in existence because it had been tested as the YAT-37 in the early 60s.
And so here we were in 67 or in 66, and I put that volunteer statement in and got selected to fly the A-37A model.
Talk a little bit more about that airplane.
People think of Cessna, and they think of the single wing, single engine plane that they see out at the airport, but a lot of people don't realize that Cessna made a fighter plane, and that was the T-37 and the A-37.
I know that you started off in the T-37 when you were at Big Spring as far as an instructor pilot, but the difference between that and the A-37?
Well, we went out to Big Spring in 1963 and we're flying the T-37, which has twin engines and the pilot or the student and the instructor sit side by side.
That airplane came off into the service in 1957.
all over the training command, and then we still had it.
And matter of fact, if you are out around Easterwood, nowadays you hear a screaming airplane.
It's probably still a T-37.
It's a few of them left around in the Air Force.
But anyhow, it had 2,000 pounds of thrust, and so...
We'd have about a 2,500-foot roll at the takeoff.
It was no tip tanks or anything, and we'd go out and we'd fly about an hour 40 mission and come back and land.
Our training, if it were low altitude, would be down to an hour 30.
Then we got sent to the A-37.
That airplane had...
had two engines, but not the same ones.
They had taken the J-85 from the T-38, taken the afterburner off of it, and inserted it into the nacelles of the T-37.
They put four bomb stations on each wing, put a gun in the nose of the aircraft, and put tip tanks on it to give us more range so that
We ended up in the final configuration that most of the missions were flown.
You had two drop tanks for fuel, and then you had six bomb stations loaded and the gun in the nose.
It was interesting.
You said you took 25 airplanes to Louisiana for training, and then when it was time to go to Benoit in Vietnam, you actually disassembled the airplanes, crated them up, took them over, and assembled them again.
That sounds like a heavy job.
Well, we had all the people that were going in this mission and the A-37 were volunteers.
And you had some of the best volunteers in the maintenance field with the enlisted troops and then the engineers.
Cessna was looking to the follow-on, which had already been agreed upon to build the A-37B model.
And so they went out and...
got all the people together and designed the crates, which we take a crate and put two wings, put the fuselage on board and you'd take about three aircraft in a C-141 to go.
So it took about 28 airplanes or C-141 loads to take all the airplanes
the people, the supplies and the ground equipment that's required to service them from Alexandria, Louisiana to Benoit Air Base in South Vietnam.
We're gonna have some photographs of the A-37 coming up in a little bit, but I want you to talk about your service in Vietnam now.
You were in country and you ended up flying some 360 missions and one of those missions on a napalm drop, your plane was hit.
Talk about that particularly and just your service in Vietnam.
Well,
Our primary mission was close air support to the Army.
And we started out working with the Army in August of 67.
Worked throughout until November in which the North Vietnamese made a penetration northwest of Benoit at the Lough Minh.
Went in
I was scheduled to go on alert duty in the morning, eight o'clock.
At 3.30 they came and said, get up and let's go.
The alert crews already finished the maximum number of missions they could fly.
So we went out and we ended up taking off at about 5.15 and got up over Lockman and went into a holding pattern.
And then the North Vietnamese made a,
a burst to try to cross a road into the compound that was occupied by the Army.
And we went in and it was like flying into the Fourth of July around here whenever the fireworks were going off.
That was in November.
And then things calmed down through December.
Went to the USO show over at Long Bend with Bob Hope and Raquel Welch and
Now, that was a large amphitheater, and when you were standing up at the top, you just saw that there was two people down there, but you couldn't tell that was Bob Hope except for the audio.
Right.
And then in January, went up to Pleiku, and we started doing truck-busting missions over in Laos.
While we were doing that then the Tet Offensive occurred in January of 68 and we started going into those missions and everything went in country to put maximum support.
We had it all one as far as the military was concerned.
Then whenever we were flying
I was flying a mission in the southwest of Saigon and went in on a napalm run, which was doing about 325 miles an hour and 100 feet off the ground.
And the bullet hit on my left wing, pulled the airplane, this was a .30 caliber, into this position, and I rolled back correct and pulled up.
looked over the left wing and saw that it had fuel going over the hot engine nacelle, shut that engine down, climbed up and moved to the closest base, which is about 50 miles away, landed, slept through, or slept through a rocket attack, and got back to the base, and that was the, you know, the missions,
You never knew what it was going to be whenever you took off.
It could be just a routine, what we call tree-busting mission.
And on the other hand, it might be troops in contact in which they're 50 meters from the friendlies.
We were called upon many times to go in on that type of close air support to break up the advance of the enemy.
Right, right.
I want to go to some pictures that we have, just a couple of pictures, and you get a better idea of what the A-37 looked like.
This is a young Texas A&M cadet, and good-looking cadet there.
What year was that taken?
Do you know?
My junior year.
Your junior year.
All right, we're a handsome man in the Air Force.
Now here's the A-37, a photograph that I procured from the internet so you get an idea of what the airplane looked like.
We've got another one of it actually in action coming up.
That's the plane you flew.
That's the plane I flew.
That's on a rocket run or it could have been escorting the spray birds.
I don't see the
You can see from that picture how close it was flying to the ground.
That's correct.
Wow.
You referred just a moment ago about truck busting.
I want you to tell people exactly what was involved in that.
It sounds like a dangerous mission.
Well, it was on the Ho Chi Minh Trail and coming into southern Laos.
Right.
And we had forward air controllers that go out that had
a night scope where they could detect the trucks moving down the trail.
Once they detected them, and this was a single airplane, and we'd go out for a two-hour flight, and unless we expended all of our ordnance, well, then we'd get the two hours in.
But they found the trucks, we carried our own flares, and we'd go in at about 3,000 feet above the trucks,
pop the flares, pull up, come back around, and we had a cluster bomb unit that would pickle off, and those cluster bomb units, when they hit the ground, were rolling, and as soon as they come to a stop, they detonate.
And that's what we'd use for busting the trucks.
Now, of course, I told you about one mission we had, and we had a ZPU-23 anti-aircraft gun that was trying to
get us as we went over going into Laos.
And so we set up a special mission with the people in Saigon so that the mission that was taken off at eight o'clock would go late and the mission that was taken off at 10 o'clock would go early.
And so we got over the ZPU and then
I happened to be in the airplane that we decided was going to be the target, and we went in on a bomb run, although we were not going to drop because we wanted him to start firing so that the other airplane that he didn't know was coming would be in position to drop a couple of 750-pounders on him, which we did, and we had no more problem with the ZPU-23 at that location.
Right.
Right, right.
I want to show the audience a couple of things here, if we can.
I'll hold them up, and you can talk about them.
This is your flight helmet right here.
This kept you pretty well protected, did it not?
Well, it's not like the helmets that they have today, but that's what we had in the 60s.
It was there if we had to punch out.
The visor was a sun visor.
The oxygen mask is detached because it was later I flew an airplane in which we did not wear the helmet, but we had the oxygen mask for emergency use.
Right.
And so that's why it's detached from the helmet now.
But it was there in case I needed it.
And unfortunately, I never had to punch out of an airplane.
Right, right.
Let's talk about this guide on a flag.
What's the story on that?
When I came back from Vietnam, I went to Baylor as an ROTC instructor.
At that time, the cadets that we had up at Baylor, we gave them what we call a flight indoctrination program.
As a part of the ROTC, we had what was called angel flight.
Well, the cadets kidded me that they were my angels because I taught the flight indoctrination program and then they went out and flew for about 30 hours of instruction time and they were my angels and they went on to
A couple of them went on to Air Force careers.
Right.
We talked about your service after Vietnam and how it really continues on today.
You came back from Vietnam in the summer of 1968.
And as you just mentioned, you went to Waco and taught ROTC at Baylor.
You wanted to go to Europe, but they were extending services in Europe, so you didn't get to go there.
So you spent a lot of your post-Vietnam career in Waco at Baylor, right?
Well, no, I spent three years at Baylor.
And I want to go to Europe.
And they said, no, we're extending everybody in Europe for a year.
And so my tour, they said, I said, well, what are you going to send me?
They'll send you back to Ground Radar.
Call a guy in Ground Radar who was a year ahead of me here at A&M.
He was from Taylor.
And I said, Jerry, what are you going to send me?
He said, I'm going to send you to...
A space systems operations officer.
I had a long pause because I said, Jerry, you know that I did not major in engineering, that I was an ag major at him.
And he said, well, I don't need engineers, I need majors.
And I said, okay.
So I ended up going to Colorado Springs in Cheyenne Mountain.
and was a missile warning officer.
But you monitor the sensor inputs that come from Tule, Greenland, Clear, Alaska,
Filingdale's Moor, United Kingdom, Shimea, the sea launch ballistic missiles around the United States, and the satellite detectors that we had that were feeding into Australia and then feeding into Denver.
And so that was my job initially as a missile warning officer.
Went from missile warning officer to head of the Space Defense Center, then ran the training
shop and then was the director of the Space Defense Center.
Went down to Eglin Air Force Base at Fort Walton Beach, Florida as an ops officer for a missile or a space truck site.
which was gonna be converted to a missile warning site, a sea launch ballistic missile.
And from there, after 11 months, we got everything going in the sea launch ballistic missile mission.
And I went to Thailand as a commander of a space track site, 350 miles North of Bangkok.
While I was there, we,
Got a notice from the ambassador to shut operations down.
And we had 60 days to disassemble and remove everything that we wanted to remove.
And that was a lot of equipment, right?
We had over a million pounds of electronics and steel and so forth.
We had four diesel engines, large, high-powered diesels.
We had a 90-foot diameter dish antenna, and we had all the electronics that was associated with that.
We disassembled it and got it out in 48 days.
Thank goodness for the Harvard.
The Harvard graduates, there was two of them that brought that off.
One was the head of TIE Electric,
which had the only 100-ton crane west of Guam.
And so in order to get the job done, we needed a 100-ton crane to pull the stem that supported the antenna straight up out of the foundation that was built.
Right.
We've only got about four minutes left, and I want to get onto a couple of other things.
Our time runs out quickly.
You had mentioned Cheyenne Mountain just near Colorado Springs, and what a secure place this was.
I think it was, what, like 2,000 feet underground or 1,000 feet underground?
Well, no, it was 3,000.
3,000 feet underground.
As a matter of fact, I've got a photograph of just about the only thing you can find a photograph of having to do with Cheyenne Mountain here, and it's the tunnel that
that goes, I guess, into the complex.
It says Cheyenne Mountain Complex right there.
It would go back into the complex for about a quarter of a mile and then we had double doors that were over two feet thick and those doors would set up and create where a blast in the tunnel or outside the tunnel could not penetrate into the complex
where we had all the electronics, we had the computers and so forth in there that ran the missile warning and space defense.
Right, and Cheyenne Mountain still operates today, much like it did back then.
It's got a big mission in the home security.
It keeps track of all the man-made satellites in space.
and feeds that information to NASA whenever they're going to launch any of the shuttle and so forth or where they can move out of the way if there was the possibility of a collision in space.
After you were overseas and they closed down your base there, you came back to Colorado Springs, eventually to Denver and Buckley field there as part of the defense support program, I know.
But I want to get you to Texas A&M when you put in the application for the ROTC program at Texas A&M and sort of what brought you here.
And then, of course, your relationship with Blinn College.
We've just got a couple of minutes.
So go over that real quickly if you can.
Well, I was at Denver or Buckley Field, and it was time to move.
And so I knew the guy that was commander of the Air Force ROTC here at Texas A&M, Colonel Durham.
And so I put in my application, got selected to be his replacement, came here in 1981.
In 1984,
It was time to move on again, and I had less than two years to go for 30, and they said, you're going back to Cheyenne Mountain, and I said, no, I'm not.
And so I retired, and I started in 1986 to work for Blinn College as an instructor and academic advisor, and then became an administrator and headed up the College Station campus.
on Harvey Road for 10 years and moved to the new campus over on Villa Maria.
And then I stepped down from the administrative role
to an instructor, which I continue to this day.
Right.
You're a part-time instructor to this day and all of the other things you do.
I know that you're very involved in the tax aid program, helping out people, and you're real busy this time of year.
And like I say, we're out of time, but I want to thank you very much for your service that still goes on today, not only military, but here in the community.
My pleasure.
All right.
I've enjoyed it.
Thank you, Colonel.
His life started across the river from Hearn and Milam County, and now Henry and Jimmy Hill live in College Station.
In between, his service took him wherever he was needed.
His fighter was shot at and hit in Vietnam, and he counts himself as one of the fortunate to come home.
We salute the service of Colonel Henry Hill, whose service to his fellow human being continues today.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.